So I hope you enjoyed making the higher or lower.
We're now back in borowe x y to look at two more important programming constructs.
The first of which is the loop.
So I'm just going to close down those windows and create a new one with some hello world code.
And then just say that.
We're ready to go.
All right.
So a loop is simply a way of running the same chunk of code over and over again and again that might
be controlling the behavior of a character that repeats again and again in an app.
It might be displaying the contents of an array that contains a bunch of the user's photos.
Something like that.
It's very fundamental to programming and there's a number of different ways that we can do it in Java
and we're going to look at three of them here in this video.
So the first one is very simple and it's known as a WHILE loop.
So let's pretend that we want to print out the numbers 1 to 10 on the console.
So nice and simple we could of course just print those out.
But then if we wanted to change that to print out the numbers 1 to 100 that would take a very long time.
So a loop allows us to do that with minimal code.
So we're going to start by creating an integer which I'll call X and initially X will be set to 1 and
this is going to be our counter variable that counts up from 1 to 10 and then we're going to use the
Y all keyword.
And we're going to continue doing how loop as long as X is less than or equal to 10.
So that statement means while X is less than or equal to 10 fairly straightforward and then we just
have our brackets say we're going to do whatever's inside these curly brackets as long as X is less
than or equal to 10 and I think that we're getting today is print x to the console.
So system out print line and we just want to print X that's it.
Aware that if you run that code now think about what's going to happen.
Hopefully you realize that this is going to go on forever and ever and ever because X is going to remain
one and probably crash your browser or give you some kind of error.
So what we actually want to do is add one to X and there's two ways we can do that the longhand way
of doing it is to use the command x is equal to x plus one which will just increment X by one or we
can use a nice shortcut X plus plus.
So this set up is used in a number of coding languages so you may well have seen it before but this
is how it works in Java and whenever you want to add one to a number.
Generally I would recommend using X plus plus just because it's shorter and easier to use than X equals
x plus one.
So let's take a look.
There we go.
Nice and easy.
So one two three four five six seven eight nine ten.
So here's a quick challenge for you.
Can you print just the even numbers from 1 to 10.
So just the numbers between 1 and 10 inclusive.
Go for it
if you figured it out as a number of different ways to do it.
Probably the simplest is to change the command here.
So we're printing two times x to the console rather than just X and that's going to give us 2 4 6 8
etc..
But that of course would take us all the way to 20 and we won't.
They even numbers from 1 to 10.
So we just change x to go up to and include five.
Hope you manage that two four six eight ten.
There we go.
So that's a while loop.
The next one we're going to look at is a for loop which is very similar but it just keeps everything
together in quite a neat way.
I'm going to leave the wild leap there because we're going to create the same thing but in a follow
up.
So if you use a follow up we use the for keyword and then this time we create our counter variable inside
the instruction for the loop.
So this time we're going to create a variable int I'll call it y this time and we'll set it to 1 initially.
So why is it close to 1.
And then we use a semi-colon even though it's not quite the end of the command yet.
It's just the end of that bit of the command.
So initially we're going to set Y to 1.
We're going to carry on as long as Y is less than or equal to 5.
So exactly the same as before and each time we run the leap we're going to add 1 to Y so that y plus
plus and that's all that we need to set up our for loop and we have our curly brackets and same as before
we get to have system out print line Y times to there we go.
And if we just run that we'll see that it applies to physics I tend to for six eight 10 I.
So almost all ways you can choose whether you want to use a while loop or for loop to be honest I find
myself using while loops most of the time but you'll probably have your favorite and you really can
choose whichever you like depending on the situation.
So let's just mess with these a little bit.
I'm going to get rid of the while loop for now.
So what if we wanted to do things in the opposite order.
So we wanted to go 10 8 6 4 2.
Well as you can imagine we start with why is equal to 5.
We keep going as long as y here.
I'm going to put a greater than zero g.
So we keep going as long as Y is greater than zero.
And instead of adding one to waste time we subtract one from White each time and then if we run that
we'll find that we start off with 10 that we get and then we subtract two each time because we're subtracting
1 but then doubling it.
All right.
Say I'm going to give you a couple of challenges this time you can choose which one to do.
There's an easier challenge and then a harder challenge the easier challenge is to choose which ever
loop system you like and display the first 10 multiples of three.
OK.
Fairly straightforward.
You can do that if you like if you want a bigger challenge then create a loop that will display the
first 10 triangular numbers and I'm not even going to tell you what the triangular numbers are part
of the challenge is to go and find that out for yourself.
So if you want a nice basic challenge go for the first time multiples of three if you want more of a
challenge then create a loop to display the first 10 triangular numbers.
Whichever one you go for.
Good luck.
Giffard
all right.
Well I'm going to go for a follow up and I'm going to do it slightly differently to the way we did it
before.
I'm going to create an integer.
I'm going to call it.
This time is usually the counter variable that we use.
You can use Apsley any letter or word that you like is quite common and I'm going to start off with
I being three I'm going to keep going as long as I is less than or equal to 30 because the tenth multiples
of three is of course 30 whoops I'm going to change that from a comma to a semicolon and then I'm going
to use I equals I plus three has my rule.
Every time the loop goes round there we go.
So hopefully that makes sense.
We start with eyes three.
We add three every time.
And we keep going as long as I is less than or equal to 30.
And if we do it that way then this line just becomes system out.
Print alone I symbolised that.
Take a look.
3 6 9 12 fantastic all the way up to 13.
So whichever way you did that well them for the tougher challenge then let's get rid of that and we
want to now print the first 10 triangular numbers.
So I hope you did something like googled triangular numbers and if you didn't know before the triangle
numbers are numbers that represent triangles or triangles can easily be made from.
So we start with 1 3 6 10.
And the key thing about triangle numbers is they the difference between them goes up by 1 each time.
So for the first Wrangler number to the second we add two from the second to the third we at three from
the third to the fourth.
We add four cetera et cetera.
So there's a great number of ways that we could do this because I used a full leap last time round.
I'm going to use a while loop this time.
So I start by defining my X will start with x is equal to 1.
And this time I'm going to keep going as long as X itself is less than or equal to a 10.
So X is not going to be my triangular number.
X is going to be my count variable and that helps because I don't know what the tenth triangular number
is.
And if I do it this way I don't need to know.
At least not while I'm writing the code.
So let's not forget to increment X at the end of that portion of the loop.
Otherwise it will go on forever and then I'm going to create another integer.
I'm going to call it triangular number and my first triangular number is equal to 1.
So I'll save that then.
And then in my loop I'm going to
print triangular number
to the console.
So so far this is just going to print one 10 times.
So to make this into the triangle the numbers remember I need to add on to first time three the next
time for the next time five the next time etc..
So if I go down below the point where I've incremented X say X the first time round is now 2 and then
it's going to be three and then four and then five.
And that is of course the number that I need to add to triangular number to get the next triangular
number.
So I can just use triangular number.
He calls what it was before.
So triangular number plus X and then next time round when it loops round it will print the new triangular
number which will be the next one in the sequence.
That's it.
That's my solution.
Let's just have a look and make sure that that works.
1 3 6 10 15 21:28 fantastic.
Those are indeed the first 10 triangular numbers.
Great.
I hope you manage to do one of those two challenges.
Particular Congratulations if you managed to do the trickier one.
Now let's get rid of that because I'm going to show you the third type of leap and that is looping through
the contents of an array.
And that's a really useful thing to be able to do.
Do you use the example that I said earlier it have an array of uses photos and display all of those
using a loop.
So very many challenge for you.
Can you create an array containing the names of the people in your family.
So just three or four if you've got more.
Feel free to put them in but just three or four names to be working with.
Go for it.
I remembered how to do that.
So they're strings and we use the square brackets to show that we want to create an array
I'm going to call my family members and then we said equal t and
we can't use curly brackets to create the array.
And here I go.
So Rob Keston told me and Ralphy and then a semi-colon.
So hopefully you remember that construct from last video.
Now to loop through that's one thing we could do would be to use a for loop and just keep going as long
as we were in the loop.
But there's a much quicker way of doing it.
And that's to use what you might know as a foreach loop.
So it just loops through everything in the array.
So we do that is we use our full command and then we want to create a variable that will be the name
each time round.
Each time we go through a particular member of the array.
So that's going to be a string
and I'll call it name and we're going to get it from the array family members.
So that's a new kind of construct that we haven't seen before and it's quite specific to this particular
set up so for.
And then we create our variable name which is a string and we're going to get that from the family members
array by looping through its.
And then we can access the variable name in the middle of the loop just in the usual way.
So system it's print line and name that's it.
So let's take a look.
There we go.
So that loops through the whole of the array and allowed us to access each value within it.
The last thing I want to show you is how to do this with an array list.
So a fun little challenge for this video.
Can you change this code so instead of creating an array like we've got here it creates an array list
called family members and then adds your family members to that list and then run the code and see what
happens.
Good luck.
All right I hope you saw what happened.
And you got some kind of error message.
So to create our array list just like we did in the previous video we would use list and then family
members and that's a new array list.
You're very familiar.
Before we get any now Sierra's let's make sure that we import what we need.
So the torch you tell don't stop.
And then we add our members to our list.
So family members taught.
And then Rob and I'm just going to copy that so you don't have to watch me type it four times.
Keston
me roughly.
OK so you may think that all looks fine but we're going to get an aura.
There it is so incompatible types.
So we needed a string here when we created our name.
But the actual variable type that we found is an object which is slightly strange because these are
all strings you would have thought that would all be fine.
But it's not and that's because when we created our list we didn't define what type of variable was
going to be stored in our list.
And that means that we end up with an object which is a kind of generic type variable which doesn't
allow us to create a string from it.
So to get round that we need to specify the type of variable that we want to have in our list.
And we do that using angle brackets when we create the list.
So we want to have strings.
So we use list and then angle brackets with string afterwards.
And similarly we put that in and out frailest command as well.
So just like that.
So now we've created exactly what we had before but this time that all strings rather than the more
generic objects and let's now run that.
And we should find that it all works fine that we get.
So it is conventional If you know what type of object is going to be in your list to define it right
at the start.
And that then stops you having to have problems later on.
Brilliant.
So now we've covered our three loop types in the next video we're going to check out.
Classes and objects in a bit more detail so hopefully you'll finally understand what all this object
oriented programming is all about.